README.md, before:

# clog

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10%20|%203.11%20|%203.12%20|%203.13-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![Code Style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## Features

- **AI-Powered Changelog Generation:** Automatically generates clear, comprehensive changelog entries using large language models.
- **Git Tag Integration:** Uses git tags to automatically detect version changes and generate appropriate changelog sections.
- **Smart Change Analysis:** Analyzes commit messages, file changes, and code patterns to categorize changes appropriately.
- **Multi-Provider & Model Support:** Works with various AI providers (Anthropic, Cerebras, Groq, OpenAI, Ollama) and models.
- **Keep a Changelog Format:** Follows the [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/) standard format with proper categorization.
- **Intelligent Version Detection:** Automatically detects which tags need changelog entries by comparing with existing changelog content.
- **Interactive Workflow:** Review and approve generated content before updating your changelog.


## How It Works

clog analyzes your git tags and commits to generate changelog entries. It examines:

- **Git Tags**: Identifies version releases and their associated commits
- **Commit History**: Analyzes commit messages and changed files between versions
- **Existing Changelog**: Detects what's already documented to avoid duplicates
- **Change Categorization**: Uses AI to properly categorize changes as Added, Changed, Fixed, etc.

### Technical Architecture

- **Smart Tag Detection**: Automatically finds new tags since the last changelog update
- **Commit Analysis**: Examines commit messages, file changes, and code patterns
- **AI-Powered Generation**: Uses structured prompts to generate well-organized changelog entries
- **Format Compliance**: Ensures output follows Keep a Changelog standards

## How to Use

After setting up the tool, updating your changelog is simple:

```sh
# Run from your git repository root
clog

# This will:
# 1. Detect new git tags since last changelog update
# 2. Analyze commits for each new version
# 3. Generate changelog entries using AI
# 4. Show preview and ask for confirmation
# 5. Update your CHANGELOG.md file
```

To create a pull request with your changelog updates:

```sh
# Create a pull request with changelog updates
clog -p

# This will:
# 1. Detect new git tags (or specified range)
# 2. Analyze commits for each new version
# 3. Generate changelog entries using AI
# 4. Show preview and ask for confirmation
# 5. Create a new branch with the changelog updates
# 6. Commit the changes
# 7. Push the branch to origin
# 8. Create a pull request using GitHub CLI
```

![Simple clog Usage](assets/clog-usage.png)

## Installation and Configuration

### 1. Installation

#### Quick Try with uvx (no installation)

You can try clog without installing it using uvx:

```sh
# Try clog without installation
uvx clog --help

# Set up configuration (creates ~/.clog.env)
uvx clog init

# Use clog in your git repository
cd your-project
uvx clog
```

#### Permanent Installation

Install system-wide using pipx:

```sh
# Install pipx if you don't have it
python3 -m pip install --user pipx
python3 -m pipx ensurepath

# Install clog
pipx install clog
```

Verify installation:

```sh
clog --version
```

### 2. Configuration

The recommended way to configure `clog` is using the interactive setup:

```sh
clog init
```

This command will guide you through selecting an AI provider, model, and securely entering your API keys. It will create or update a user-level configuration file at `$HOME/.clog.env`.

Example `$HOME/.clog.env` output:

```env
CLOG_MODEL=anthropic:claude-3-5-haiku-latest
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_key_here
```

#### Managing Configuration with `clog config`

You can manage settings in your `$HOME/.clog.env` file using config commands:

- Show config: `clog config show`
- Set a value: `clog config set CLOG_MODEL groq:meta-llama/llama-4-scout-17b-16e-instruct`
- Get a value: `clog config get CLOG_MODEL`
- Unset a value: `clog config unset CLOG_MODEL`

### 3. Verify Setup

Test that `clog` is working properly with your configuration:

```sh
# Make sure you have some git tags in your repository
git tag v0.1.0
git tag v0.2.0

# Run clog to generate entries
clog --dry-run
```

You should see an AI-generated changelog preview.

### 4. Upgrade

To upgrade `clog` to the latest version, run:

```sh
pipx upgrade clog
```

## Basic Usage

Once installed and configured, using `clog` is straightforward:

1. Make sure you have git tags in your repository:

   ```sh
   git tag v1.0.0
   git tag v1.1.0
   ```

2. Run `clog`:

   ```sh
   clog
   ```

   This will detect new tags, analyze commits, and generate changelog entries for review.

### Common Commands

- Generate changelog entries: `clog`
- Auto-accept the generated content: `clog -y`
- Preview without saving: `clog --dry-run`
- Process specific tag range: `clog --from-tag v1.0.0 --to-tag v1.2.0`
- Add hints for the AI: `clog -h "Focus on breaking changes"`
- Use different changelog file: `clog -f CHANGES.md`
- Show the AI prompt: `clog --show-prompt`


### Advanced Usage Examples

```sh
# Process only new tags since last update
clog

# Process specific version range
clog --from-tag v1.0.0 --to-tag v1.2.0

# Dry run with AI hints
clog --dry-run -h "Focus on user-facing changes"

# Use different model
clog -m "openai:gpt-4"

# Different changelog file location
clog -f docs/CHANGELOG.md

# Create a pull request with changelog updates
clog -p
```

## Configuration Options

clog loads configuration from two locations (in order of precedence):

1. User-level `$HOME/.clog.env` (applies to all projects for the user)
2. Project-level `.clog.env` (in the project root, overrides user config)

Environment variables always take final precedence over both files.

### Available Configuration Variables

- `CLOG_MODEL`: AI model to use (e.g., "anthropic:claude-3-5-haiku-latest")
- `CLOG_TEMPERATURE`: Model temperature (0.0-2.0, default: 0.7)
- `CLOG_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS`: Maximum tokens for AI response (default: 1024)
- `CLOG_WARNING_LIMIT_TOKENS`: Warn when prompt exceeds this limit (default: 16384)
- `CLOG_LOG_LEVEL`: Logging level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR)

## Best Practices

- **Tag Consistently**: Use semantic versioning for your git tags (v1.0.0, v1.1.0, etc.)
- **Write Good Commit Messages**: Clear commit messages help generate better changelog entries
- **Review Before Saving**: Always review AI-generated content before accepting
- **Keep API Keys Secure**: Use the config commands to manage API keys safely
- **Regular Updates**: Run clog after each release to keep your changelog current

## Requirements

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Git repository with tags
- AI provider API key (Anthropic, OpenAI, Groq, etc.)
- GitHub CLI installed and configured (required for PR creation functionality)

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

For information about AI agent integrations, see [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Community & Support

For questions, suggestions, or support, please open an issue or discussion on GitHub.

Commit message:

feat(core): add support for tracking unreleased changes in changelog generation
- Implement automatic detection of unreleased changes since the last git tag
- Add 'Unreleased' section to changelog when current commit is not tagged
- Enhance main business logic to process both tagged releases and unreleased changes
- Introduce is_current_commit_tagged() function to check if HEAD has associated tags
- Update changelog formatting to handle None tag values gracefully
- Add comprehensive tests for the new tag detection functionality
- Improve console output to indicate when unreleased changes are being processed
- Document unreleased changes feature in AGENTS.md and README.md
- Demonstrate dogfooding by using clog to maintain its own CHANGELOG.md file

README.md, after:

# clog

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10%20|%203.11%20|%203.12%20|%203.13-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![Code Style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](LICENSE)

## Features

- **AI-Powered Changelog Generation:** Automatically generates clear, comprehensive changelog entries using large language models.
- **Git Tag Integration:** Uses git tags to automatically detect version changes and generate appropriate changelog sections.
- **Unreleased Changes Support:** Automatically tracks changes since the last git tag in an "Unreleased" section.
- **Dogfooding:** This project uses `clog` to maintain its own `CHANGELOG.md` file!
- **Smart Change Analysis:** Analyzes commit messages, file changes, and code patterns to categorize changes appropriately.
- **Multi-Provider & Model Support:** Works with various AI providers (Anthropic, Cerebras, Groq, OpenAI, Ollama) and models.
- **Keep a Changelog Format:** Follows the [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/) standard format with proper categorization.
- **Intelligent Version Detection:** Automatically detects which tags need changelog entries by comparing with existing changelog content.
- **Interactive Workflow:** Review and approve generated content before updating your changelog.


## How It Works

clog analyzes your git tags and commits to generate changelog entries. It examines:

- **Git Tags**: Identifies version releases and their associated commits
- **Commit History**: Analyzes commit messages and changed files between versions
- **Existing Changelog**: Detects what's already documented to avoid duplicates
- **Change Categorization**: Uses AI to properly categorize changes as Added, Changed, Fixed, etc.

### Technical Architecture

- **Smart Tag Detection**: Automatically finds new tags since the last changelog update
- **Commit Analysis**: Examines commit messages, file changes, and code patterns
- **AI-Powered Generation**: Uses structured prompts to generate well-organized changelog entries
- **Format Compliance**: Ensures output follows Keep a Changelog standards

## How to Use

After setting up the tool, updating your changelog is simple:

```sh
# Run from your git repository root
clog

# This will:
# 1. Detect new git tags since last changelog update
# 2. Analyze commits for each new version
# 3. Generate changelog entries using AI
# 4. Show preview and ask for confirmation
# 5. Update your CHANGELOG.md file
```

To create a pull request with your changelog updates:

```sh
# Create a pull request with changelog updates
clog -p

# This will:
# 1. Detect new git tags (or specified range)
# 2. Analyze commits for each new version
# 3. Generate changelog entries using AI
# 4. Show preview and ask for confirmation
# 5. Create a new branch with the changelog updates
# 6. Commit the changes
# 7. Push the branch to origin
# 8. Create a pull request using GitHub CLI
```

![Simple clog Usage](assets/clog-usage.png)

## Installation and Configuration

### 1. Installation

#### Quick Try with uvx (no installation)

You can try clog without installing it using uvx:

```sh
# Try clog without installation
uvx clog --help

# Set up configuration (creates ~/.clog.env)
uvx clog init

# Use clog in your git repository
cd your-project
uvx clog
```

#### Permanent Installation

Install system-wide using pipx:

```sh
# Install pipx if you don't have it
python3 -m pip install --user pipx
python3 -m pipx ensurepath

# Install clog
pipx install clog
```

Verify installation:

```sh
clog --version
```

### 2. Configuration

The recommended way to configure `clog` is using the interactive setup:

```sh
clog init
```

This command will guide you through selecting an AI provider, model, and securely entering your API keys. It will create or update a user-level configuration file at `$HOME/.clog.env`.

Example `$HOME/.clog.env` output:

```env
CLOG_MODEL=anthropic:claude-3-5-haiku-latest
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_anthropic_key_here
```

#### Managing Configuration with `clog config`

You can manage settings in your `$HOME/.clog.env` file using config commands:

- Show config: `clog config show`
- Set a value: `clog config set CLOG_MODEL groq:meta-llama/llama-4-scout-17b-16e-instruct`
- Get a value: `clog config get CLOG_MODEL`
- Unset a value: `clog config unset CLOG_MODEL`

### 3. Verify Setup

Test that `clog` is working properly with your configuration:

```sh
# Make sure you have some git tags in your repository
git tag v0.1.0
git tag v0.2.0

# Run clog to generate entries
clog --dry-run
```

You should see an AI-generated changelog preview.

### 4. Upgrade

To upgrade `clog` to the latest version, run:

```sh
pipx upgrade clog
```

## Basic Usage

Once installed and configured, using `clog` is straightforward:

1. Make sure you have git tags in your repository:

   ```sh
   git tag v1.0.0
   git tag v1.1.0
   ```

2. Run `clog`:

   ```sh
   clog
   ```

   This will detect new tags, analyze commits, and generate changelog entries for review.

### Common Commands

- Generate changelog entries: `clog`
- Auto-accept the generated content: `clog -y`
- Preview without saving: `clog --dry-run`
- Process specific tag range: `clog --from-tag v1.0.0 --to-tag v1.2.0`
- Add hints for the AI: `clog -h "Focus on breaking changes"`
- Use different changelog file: `clog -f CHANGES.md`
- Show the AI prompt: `clog --show-prompt`


### Advanced Usage Examples

```sh
# Process only new tags since last update
clog

# Process specific version range
clog --from-tag v1.0.0 --to-tag v1.2.0

# Dry run with AI hints
clog --dry-run -h "Focus on user-facing changes"

# Use different model
clog -m "openai:gpt-4"

# Different changelog file location
clog -f docs/CHANGELOG.md

# Create a pull request with changelog updates
clog -p
```

## Configuration Options

clog loads configuration from two locations (in order of precedence):

1. User-level `$HOME/.clog.env` (applies to all projects for the user)
2. Project-level `.clog.env` (in the project root, overrides user config)

Environment variables always take final precedence over both files.

### Available Configuration Variables

- `CLOG_MODEL`: AI model to use (e.g., "anthropic:claude-3-5-haiku-latest")
- `CLOG_TEMPERATURE`: Model temperature (0.0-2.0, default: 0.7)
- `CLOG_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS`: Maximum tokens for AI response (default: 1024)
- `CLOG_WARNING_LIMIT_TOKENS`: Warn when prompt exceeds this limit (default: 16384)
- `CLOG_LOG_LEVEL`: Logging level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR)

## Best Practices

- **Tag Consistently**: Use semantic versioning for your git tags (v1.0.0, v1.1.0, etc.)
- **Write Good Commit Messages**: Clear commit messages help generate better changelog entries
- **Review Before Saving**: Always review AI-generated content before accepting
- **Keep API Keys Secure**: Use the config commands to manage API keys safely
- **Regular Updates**: Run clog after each release to keep your changelog current

## Requirements

- Python 3.10 or higher
- Git repository with tags
- AI provider API key (Anthropic, OpenAI, Groq, etc.)
- GitHub CLI installed and configured (required for PR creation functionality)

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines.

For information about AI agent integrations, see [AGENTS.md](AGENTS.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Community & Support

For questions, suggestions, or support, please open an issue or discussion on GitHub.
